
                    INTRODUCTION TO OUR BIRD FRIENDS
                                VOLUME 2


                          Text by L. B. Carson
                    Illustrations by Orville O. Rice

                            Copyright, 1957
                      BY CAPPER PUBLICATIONS, INC.

                Printed in the United States of America




                                FOREWORD


More and more people are turning to the outdoors and the enjoyment of
nature. Many great Americans have been students of wild birds. This is
not accidental, for few forms of outdoor recreation offer so much
pleasure.

The _season_ of the year will in some cases determine what birds are in
your area. _Color_ is important in identifying species. Look carefully
at the _silhouette_ or _shape_; is it slender or chunky, is the tail
short or long? Compare its _size_ with a bird with which you are more
familiar. _Habitat_ is important, too. One learns to look for Red-winged
Blackbirds in wet marshes; for a meadowlark in pastures and fields.
_Behavior_ is a clue. Does it walk or hop; does it soar, does it walk
headfirst down a tree, as is the habit of the nuthatch, or scratch among
leaves like the towhee? Listen to the bird’s _song_ and _call note_.
With a little experience, distinctive songs may be identified. Each bird
has its characteristic song.

Bird study can be pursued with as much effort as the watcher cares to
exert. Birds need food, water and protection from their natural enemies.
You can provide these in your own yard. Some birds will be attracted and
you can study them at your leisure. Other species, those which live in
swamps, for example, must be searched for aggressively.

A bird guide is a splendid investment, considering the hours of pleasure
it will bring you. Binoculars are a help, too, in studying the size,
shape, beak, legs and color pattern.

Make written notes of what you see and hear, or a dated list of species
and numbers of each. Records will add to your own pleasure and add to
the sum of knowledge on birds in general.

This is the second booklet on common birds of the United States
published by Capper Publications, Inc. Each of the two volumes
illustrates and describes 50 different species. Additional copies
(specify whether volume I or II is desired) may be ordered for 25 cents
each as follows:

  Bird Book Department 2
  Capper Publications, Inc.
  8th and Jackson Streets
  Topeka, Kansas


White Pelican
_Pelecanus erythrorhynchos_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Soaring overhead during migration, a flock of White Pelicans is a
magnificent sight. These great birds weigh as much as 15 pounds, have a
wingspread of 9 feet and a total length of more than 5 feet. Their legs
are sturdy but short, the toes fully webbed. The bill is long and flat
with a pouch beneath the lower mandible. Three contrasting colors make
this bird easily identified. The bird is white except for the outer
two-thirds of the wings where the end and rear half is black. The bill,
pouch and feet are yellow or reddish-yellow.

The head is carried well back, which rests the bill and pouch on the
shoulders. They float high on the water and when surrounded by ducks and
grebes, they look like aircraft carriers with a destroyer escort.

Unlike the smaller Brown Pelican, these birds do not dive for their
food, but form a line, drive the fish to shallow water, where their
built-in landing nets ladle the small fry out of the water. Many
“crawdads” find that an open pouch is no place to hide when these birds
wave their open beaks back and forth in shallow water.

Pelicans must have originated the game of “follow the leader,” for in
flight, whatever the leader does, each bird follows in turn.

  On mammoth wings
  They wend their way,
  On silent flight,
  Across the bay.


Snowy Egret
_Leucophoyx thula_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Like ghosts from a bloody past, Snowy Egrets have returned to add their
beauty to American bird life. Woman’s vanity and man’s desire for money
once brought these beautiful herons almost to the point of extinction.
The dainty recurved plumes, which formed a part of the breeding plumage
of the birds, were known as “cross aigrettes,” when they were sold by
milliners. Women bought, men slaughtered, and egrets died, not only for
the plumes; but the nestlings starved after the adults were killed.
Plume hunters have departed and the birds are now found in their
favorite swamps.

This bird has a length of 20 to 25 inches, white with black bill and
legs. The feet are yellow, giving it the nickname of “the bird with the
golden slippers.” The young of the Little Blue Heron are also white but
have greenish legs, while the bill is 2-tone, blue with black tip. The
American Egret is much larger and shows a yellow bill.

The Snowy Egret formerly nested in the Deep South, but is gradually
extending its range to include more northern areas. They are prone to
wander widely after the breeding season. Western birders will find the
Brewster’s Snowy Egret in their area.

  With yellow slippers
  And spotless plumes,
  Which are more charming
  The brides or grooms?


Green Heron
_Butorides virescens_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Anyone who spends time near a lake, pond or stream will find this small
heron, for it is there that he secures the minnows, frogs and crayfish
which form the major portion of his diet. His favorite method is to
stand quietly on a partly submerged log where fish are feeding within
reach of his long neck and bill. A quick thrust and one course is
served. At other times you will see him sneaking carefully up to the
water’s edge, where some slight ripple indicates the movement of fish or
frogs.

This bird is small, measuring only 16 to 22 inches in length, but
appears even smaller until he extends his long chestnut-colored neck. At
a distance he appears to be black but a closer view shows a bluish or
greenish tinge to the feathers, depending on lighting conditions. His
legs are short and range from greenish to almost orange in color,
depending on the season.

The Green Heron builds a loosely-constructed nest, usually not more than
20 feet above the ground, but often some distance from water. They are
inclined to nest singly, but may form loose colonies when abundant. The
3 to 5 eggs are greenish in color and can usually be seen thru the frail
structure which these birds consider home.

  Sometimes they’re green
  And sometimes blue
  When reflected light
  Plays tricks on you.


Canada Goose
_Branta canadensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

There is something about the Canada Goose that demands respect. Farmers
see him as a weather prophet for his fall flight indicates that winter
is on the way, while his spring migration tells them that warmer days
will follow. Hunters see him as the prize game bird, worthy of their
best efforts. Others point to this bird as a model for man, for his
strength, courage and fidelity leave little to be desired. Even the
newsboy stops selling papers to watch and listen as these great birds
pass over the cities.

Americans are fortunate, for at least one of the 5 sub-species of Canada
Geese is found in all areas. They range from the Cackling Goose, a small
dark sub-species not much larger than a Mallard and weighing around 3
pounds, to the huge Western Canada and the Common Canada with weights of
10 pounds or more. Richardson’s Goose at 4 pounds and the Lesser Canada
at 5 pounds are two smaller sub-species both lighter in plumage like the
Common Canada.

All show the same pattern: black head, neck, tail, feet and bill with a
white cheek patch and light belly. Back and wings are brownish-gray. The
cheek patch in most types is joined beneath the chin. The white of the
belly extends around the tail, making the black tail feathers
distinctive. The gray shows a barred effect.

  He comes in various sizes,
  And raises quite a din,
  But you can always know him
  By the strap beneath his chin.


American Pintail
_Anas acuta_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This duck has the widest nesting range of any species in the northern
hemisphere. An American Pintail looks much the same whether you find him
in Hawaii, Europe, Asia, Alaska, Canada, Mexico or on either coast of
the United States. The drake is a large gray-backed, white-breasted
duck. The white of the breast extends up the long neck to a point back
of the brown head; gray feathers extend up the back of the neck to the
head. The tail gives a clue to the name, for the 2 center feathers are
long, black and pointed. The female is a mottled brown and shows a long,
thin neck, bluish-gray feet and a pointed but not elongated tail.

These birds are strong fliers and do much of their courting on the wing,
the female leading a convoy of males, each trying to outdo the others.
Perhaps she chooses the strongest flier for her mate. The male has a
whistled note while the female utters a muffled quack.

Pintails feed in shallow water where their long necks give them some
advantage over the shorter-necked puddle ducks which enjoy the same
habitat. Nests are placed on dry ground and are usually a deep hollow
lined with grasses and down. The site is variable and might be near or
far from water, but the American Pintail will go all out to protect her
young.

  A flock of “sprigs,”
  The hunters say,
  As these flash by
  At break of day.


Blue-winged Teal
_Anas discors_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Some people call this bird the “Summer Duck.” The fact he arrives late
in spring and departs for his winter home before the heavy frosts
indicates a desire to evade cold weather. Most of these ducks are well
on their way to Mexico or South America when other species begin to
arrive from the nesting grounds. Early migration saves the lives of many
Blue-wings for hunters prefer this duck for eating. Their speedy flight,
their erratic twisting and turning, their tendency to decoy—all offer a
challenge to the nimrod.

The blue wing patch, from which this duck derives its name, also is
shared by the Cinnamon Teal which replaces this bird in western areas.
Shovellers also carry a similar marking. The reddish color of the male
Cinnamon Teal and the huge bill of the Shoveller help distinguish the
birds. In the eclipse plumage, both male and female Blue-wings are much
alike, but by the latter part of October the male assumes the dark head
and tail, a crescent before the eye, brown speckled body, back
gray-brown, white patch on each flank with dull yellow feet. The bill is
bluish-black. The female is brownish-gray in all plumages. Both sexes
show the blue wing patch in any plumage.

  He likes to muddle every puddle
  This handsome little teal.
  You’ll see him dredge along the sedge
  For there he finds a meal.


Ruddy Duck
_Oxyura jamaicensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This little duck is known by almost 100 different names in the areas
where he is found. But no matter what you call him or where you find
him, he is distinctive. No other duck except the Masked Duck, which is
found in the West Indies, has the stiff tail which often is carried
erect and fanned like a miniature sail. The male has a black or
blackish-brown crown and nape, depending on the season, whether breeding
or winter. The bright-blue bill, rich reddish-chestnut body and white
cheek patch make the male a beautiful bird in breeding plumage. In
winger the male assumes the grayish-brown coloring of the female, both
showing the light cheek patch with darker crown and nape. The head, neck
and feet are large for so small a bird.

These ducks are much like grebes in that they can dive or sink into the
water, are almost helpless on land, and patter some distance over the
water before taking into the air.

Ruddy ducks conceal their nests in reeds or bulrushes over water. Eggs
are larger than one would expect to find from so small a mother. The
male, unlike most ducks, seems proud to lead his little family on their
quest for food and remains near while the female incubates.

Everything about a Ruddy sets him apart from other ducks.

  No matter what you call him
  He’s nothing like the rest.
  And when it comes to diving
  He ranks among the best.


American Merganser
_Mergus merganser_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Many birds have developed beaks which help them secure their food. The
American Merganser is no exception. His beak is long and narrow and both
mandibles are edged with sharp, pointed teeth which are inclined
backward. The tip is covered by a nail or hook designed for catching and
holding fish which form the major portion of this duck’s food. These
birds are expert divers and the entire flock soon joins one of its
members which has located a school of fish. Both rough and game fish are
relished.

The male is a beautiful bird with his red bill, greenish-black head,
black back fading to an ashy-gray rump and tail. The chest, sides and
breast are white and often show a pinkish-salmon tint. Wings show a
black and white pattern and the feet are red. A large streamlined duck
sitting low in the water with a white body and black trim is
descriptive. The female has a reddish-brown head with an elongated
brushy crest, ashy-gray back and white belly. They can be confused only
with the Red-breasted Merganser, but in this case, both male and female
are crested and the male shows a white collar and reddish upper chest.

American Mergansers are rugged and linger as far north as open water
will permit securing of food.

  Like arrows winging
  From giant bow,
  You see them flying
  Straight and low.


Marsh Hawk
_Circus cyaneus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Marsh Hawk is often called “Harrier,” and his method of hunting
would justify such a name. They cover a field like a well-trained dog,
back and forth, here and there, cruising slowly with a deliberate flap
or a slow sail on wings tipped a little above the horizontal. A slight
movement, a quick pounce, and another field mouse has joined his
ancestors. The white rump patch makes a good field mark, either on the
gray-plumaged male or the brownish feathers of the female or young. The
long wings and tail make these birds appear larger than their length of
19 to 22 inches.

Marsh Hawks feed heavily on rodents but include insects, frogs or birds
in the diet. Dead animals or birds are not overlooked, thus causing the
Marsh Hawk to be blamed for kills which he did not make.

Harriers seem to take pleasure in diving at each other, and the larger
buteos, eagles, vultures, prairie chickens or flocks of ducks.

Nests are placed on the ground and are hidden by shrubs, weeds or marshy
growth. The female spends much of her time with or near the young while
the male is kept busy hunting food for his growing family. The usual
clutch contains 5 white or pale-blue eggs, lightly marked with brown
spots.

  On tireless wings
  They scan your fields
  In search of rodents
  Which cut your yields.


Bobwhite
_Colinus virginianus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This chunky little brown quail is popular in every region where he
resides. Hunters spend thousands of dollars each year in pursuit of this
feathered bombshell. Farmers appreciate having such an active ally in
their fight against the hordes of insects which menace their crops. They
enjoy hearing his cheerful whistle as they go about their daily chores.
Birders are happy to know this is one bird which offers no problem for
they can list him by either sight or sound. Anyone can point with pride
to this bird’s good character for the male can, and often does, take
charge of the brood, teaching them how to exist in a hostile world.

The male shows a white throat and line over the eye, while the female is
content to wear buffy feathers which make her only a little less
colorful. Bobwhites nest and roost on the ground and will spend their
entire lives in a limited area if shelter, food and water are available.
Many farmers co-operate with their little neighbors by planting
blackberries, multiflora rose, or raspberries along their fences, not
farming the last inch of every corner of the field. Some even leave a
little milo or other grain unharvested near the edge of their fields.
Such practices pay dividends in the harvest of insects consumed by
Bobwhites.

  Some like to shoot
  And watch him fall,
  While others like
  To hear his call.


Wilson’s Snipe
_Capella gallinago_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Wilson’s Snipe, frequently known as a “Jack Snipe,” is the most common
of 3 species which have extremely long, straight bills. All feed by
probing in soft mud where their sensitive bills soon locate and obtain
their food. This bird prefers marshy areas near streams or ponds. When
disturbed, he leaves the scene so rapidly that you might miss the
erratic, zig-zag flight, the pointed wings, the stripes on his head, the
brownish-striped plumage. You might even miss the orange tail, but you
probably will hear the rasping note which he usually utters when he
departs. The Woodcock, a similar species, feeds in dense cover and has
bars across his crown, rounded wings and a chunky build. A third
long-billed bird is the Dowitcher, which feeds in open, shallow water
and is found often in small flocks.

Many birds are noted for unusual sounds which they make. Wilson’s Snipe
is no exception; however in his case it is not a vocal effort for he
ranks low as a singer. This bird uses a flight pattern which causes a
vibration of feathers as the bird plunges diagonally downward. Observers
have noticed the 2 outer feathers of the tail seem to be separated while
on such flights; perhaps this is the clue to the unusual sound.

  His king-size beak
  Is a handy tool,
  As he probes the mud
  ’Round each grassy pool.


Upland Plover
_Bartramia longicauda_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Upland Plover is a confusing bird. Ornithologists still are arguing
about what he should be called—a sandpiper or a plover. He formerly was
known as a Bartramian Sandpiper. Now the trend seems to indicate that
Upland Sandpiper is a name which fits his habits better than Upland
Plover. Altho he has legs long enough for wading, he uses them for
traveling thru grasses, not water. When alighting, he holds his wings up
momentarily before folding them; in fact most of his actions seem more
like a plover. Whatever you call him, he still will be found on prairies
and grasslands; marshes and mud flats have no appeal to this bird.

The Upland Plover is slightly larger than a Killdeer and is buffy brown
in color. His long neck, small head with rather short beak, long tail,
hovering flight, but most of all his prolonged call, make identification
easy. His long-drawn, mournful whistle seems to blend with breezes which
blow above the prairies, and once heard, is not easily forgotten.

These birds once were scarce due to heavy shooting by market hunters,
who slaughtered them in great numbers. They now are protected in much of
their range, but unfortunately this protection does not extend to their
winter home in South America.

  We hear your clear
  But mournful cry,
  As you go tip-toeing
  Thru the sky.


Greater Yellow-legs
_Totanus melanoleucus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Sandpipers can be confusing, especially in fall plumage. Mixed flocks
require special checking even by experts, but not the Greater
Yellow-legs. His large size, slender build, yellow legs, gray upper
parts, white tail coverts and under parts can be confused only with the
Lesser Yellow-legs (Totanus flavipes). When together, there is no
problem for the latter measures 9½ to 11 inches while the Greater
Yellow-legs runs from 13 to 15 inches in length. The small, slim beak of
the Lesser is straight, whereas the heavier bill of the Greater seems to
be slightly upturned. The call is different, for the larger bird uses a
loud 3 or 4 note whistle. The smaller uses less volume in his 1 or 2
note effort.

This sandpiper prefers mud flats and his long legs permit him to feed in
deeper water where he adds minnows and crayfish to his diet. He can
swallow small fish but occasionally lands one which must be reduced to
bite size. However, the bird is persistent and soon completes his meal.

The Greater Yellow-legs migrates thruout the United States and may be
seen around any suitable habitat. It nests as far north as Alaska and
Labrador and may winter far into South America; however many remain
along our southern shores and bayous.

  They could not miss
  When naming you.
  Those yellow legs
  Gave them the clue.


Avocet
_Recurvirostra americana_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The black and white plumage of this medium-size shore bird is
distinctive. A closer inspection will show long, blue legs, a thin,
upturned bill and in breeding plumage, a rusty neck and head with white
before the eye. In winter, the rusty markings are replaced by a gray
wash. European birds lack the colorful neck and head markings, but show
the black and white pattern and often are called Awl-birds. The bill
gives the clue to such a name.

The Avocet feeds by wading in shallow water and swinging his bill back
and forth; flocks often advance and feed in unison. These birds also are
capable swimmers and have been observed while feeding like puddle ducks,
tipping up and extending their heads far under water in search of
insects and small crustacea.

Avocets formerly nested as far east as New Jersey but now favor the
shores of ponds, lakes and sloughs in the western areas. Sun-dried mud
or alkaline flats often bring loose colonies of these birds, anywhere
from Southern Texas to Alberta and British Columbia. When disturbed,
they circle overhead, utter a series of yelping calls or feign a broken
wing in order to lure you away from their nesting sites.

  The upturned beak,
  The legs so blue,
  The black and white
  All point to you.


Wilson’s Phalarope
_Steganopus tricolor_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Phalaropes are unique. Unlike most birds, the female is more colorful,
does most of the courting, leaves nest building, incubating and rearing
of young to the long-suffering male. Her lone contribution to the
rearing of the family is laying eggs. She does deserve some credit,
however, for she remains in the area and will join the male in circling
overhead when the nest is disturbed, both uttering a sort of nasal,
trumpet-like toot.

Wilson’s Phalarope is not only the largest phalarope, but prefers inland
marshes, while the Red Phalarope and Northern Phalarope spend more time
at sea. In breeding plumage, the female shows a distinctive black line
down the side of the neck, starting in front of the eye and blending
into a chestnut wash on the shoulders. Under parts and throat are white,
wings gray with a gray line extending thru the cinnamon buff of the
back. The male is grayer with a cinnamon wash on the neck. In fall, both
birds show dark wings, white rump patch and light plumage. The long,
needle-like bill and the whirling motion when swimming are good clues to
identification in any season. When feeding in shallow water, these birds
are active, always in a hurry and running from place to place.

  You’re just a sissy,
  That we know,
  For you let Mama
  Steal the show.


Ring-billed Gull
_Larus delawarensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Audubon, in 1840, referred to this species as the common American gull,
but due to the change in habitat and increase in population, these birds
have departed from many of their former nesting areas. However, next to
the larger Herring Gull, it still is one of the most widely distributed.
These birds form breeding colonies on islands in Northern United States
and Southern Canada, often sharing these sites with the Cormorant and
the Common Tern. Like other gulls, they are not to be trusted around
unprotected nests of other species, for eggs are considered quite a
delicacy in a gull’s diet.

The black ring near the end of this bird’s bill is not a good field mark
unless you are near or use powerful glasses to check the specimen. It
looks much like a Herring Gull, except for the smaller size (18-20
inches), as compared with the 23-26 inches of the Herring Gull. The
Ring-billed shows greenish-yellow legs, whereas the Herring has
flesh-colored ones. Both birds show a gray mantle with black wing tips
surrounding a white spot. The Herring shows a little more white in this
respect. Young of the Ring-billed are a lighter buff than most other
species and show a black band near the end of the tail.

  That little ring you’re wearing,
  Tho faint, still gives a clue,
  When with other gulls you’re flying,
  We know it’s really you.


Great Horned Owl
_Bubo virginianus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Great Horned Owl, largest of the eared owls, is found over a wide
area and may be either light or dark in color, depending on the area
where he is found. All specimens show a white throat, ear tufts and
yellow eyes. This bird is almost 2 feet in length and can handle
fair-sized animals when pressed by hunger. The hoot of this bird is
deeper, slower and more uniform than that of the Barred Owl, and often
can be heard as a sort of conversational note between 2 birds in the
same area. It is given as a 2-note “Who-who,” and answered by a similar
call from another bird some distance away. These calls are given on a
different pitch.

These owls nest early and often use old structures which were built by
hawks, crows or eagles. Hollow trees or stone ledges furnish desirable
locations. They are good parents and defend their home and young against
all comers, including men. Crows and jays take delight in heckling these
owls, but are careful to keep a safe distance, for Great Horned Owls see
well in bright sunlight, altho they do most of their hunting in
darkness. Their diet includes almost any type of animal life available,
but rabbits, rats, squirrels and mice seem to be preferred. Some feed on
starlings and pigeons which they find around city buildings.

  “Who-who?” you ask
  In querulous tone,
  When folks invade
  Your woodsy home.


Yellow-shafted Flicker
_Colaptes auratus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

People once called this bird a Yellow-hammer. Lots of folks still do,
and it’s but one of the many names applied to this beautiful woodpecker.
His brown-barred back, black crescent on the throat, spotted breast,
white rump patch and bounding flight, his large size, his loud drumming,
his posturing and his loud calls all point to this bird or, if you live
in the west, the Red-shafted Flicker. The latter shows a reddish tint to
the wings and tail where this bird shows yellow. Heads of males are
marked differently, in that the western bird shows a red line extending
down from the mouth, while the Yellow-shafted shows black lines.

A flicker prefers ants to any other food, and nature has equipped him
with a long, sticky tongue which permits him to explore anthills or
tunnels in trees where these insects might be lurking. When ants are not
available, he turns to other insects, fruit or berries, one of his
favorites the seeds of the poison ivy.

Flickers usually excavate their homes in the trunks of dead trees, the
entrance about 3 inches across and extending downward to as much as 24
inches. Both birds apply themselves to this task, leaving small bits of
wood in the bottom in lieu of other nesting material.

  Sometimes he will surprise you
  By feeding on your lawn.
  But there you’re apt to find him
  Until the ants are gone.


Red-bellied Woodpecker
_Centurus carolinus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

If you look for a red belly on this bird, you might miss him entirely.
Look instead for the red crown and nape, the heavily-barred back and
wings and grayish-white under parts. The female lacks the red crown,
only the nape showing this brilliant coloring. These birds are about the
same size as Hairy Woodpeckers (9 to 10½ inches) and are rather shy,
spending much of their time in wooded areas. Bird feeders supplied with
corn and nut meats with ample pieces of suet will bring them to your
yard. Their natural food consists of beetles and other insects, together
with a generous helping of wild fruits, seeds, acorns and when
available, some corn. It also relishes both juice and pulp of oranges.

Like other woodpeckers, the Red-bellied excavates nesting holes in trees
where their 3 to 5 eggs are laid. Starlings often are waiting to take
over these newly-constructed homes and form a real menace to these
hard-working birds.

Red-bellied Woodpeckers seem to be permanent residents in suitable
locations, not migrating like flickers and Red-headed Woodpeckers.
However, they usually are more common in southern areas with a northern
limit of Southern Minnesota and Delaware.

  In deepest woods
  Or near our door,
  You seem quite happy
  With your chore.


Red-headed Woodpecker
_Melanerpes erythrocephalus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

If all birds wore contrasting colors like the Red-headed Woodpecker,
identifying birds would be easy. You just can’t miss on this one—the red
head and neck, white under parts, blue-black back and tail, black wings
with a broad white patch. The young show a grayish-brown head but the
white wing patch gives you the clue.

These beautiful birds once were common and nested from the Gulf of
Mexico to the southern edge of some Canadian provinces. Recent years
have shown a decline in their numbers, probably due to Starlings taking
over their nesting cavities before the woodpeckers can rear their
broods. Another factor is their destruction by speeding automobiles.
These birds feed on flying insects, and often drop down on our highways
in pursuit of grasshoppers. Motor cars and some drivers have no respect
for wildlife, no matter how beautiful or beneficial.

Beechnuts, acorns, pecans and various fruits and berries are consumed in
quantity, and a good supply often will hold these birds far north of
their usual winter range. Most Red-headed Woodpeckers migrate, and like
flickers, sometimes fly at night, as both species have been recovered
after hitting television towers.

  They like to build
  Their cozy homes
  In poles equipped
  For telephones.


Crested Flycatcher
_Myiarchus crinitus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Flycatchers can be, and often are, noisy birds. They seem to enjoy life
and want the world to know how they feel about it. The Crested
Flycatcher is no exception. To hear this bird at his best, stroll
quietly thru some heavily-wooded area. You scarcely are aware of the
flute-like tones of the Wood Thrush in the distance, drum of the Downy
Woodpecker, the bubbling tones of the Carolina Wren. All is serene.
Suddenly a loudly-whistled “wheeep,” followed by a series of equally
loud rolling notes, shatters the air. That is the Crested Flycatcher.

You might see him sitting quietly, peering intently at every leaf and
branch, slowly moving his head so nothing will be missed. Then you will
see the rufous tail, yellow belly, olive head and back, grayish throat
and 2 wing bars. You might see the slight crest from which he gets his
name. He is a trim bird almost robin size.

These flycatchers will nest in most any type of hole or cavity, even
bird houses when available. They prefer heavily-wooded areas. They have
the habit of using snakeskins either in the nesting material or draped
into the entrance. Perhaps it makes them feel secure. Since Americans
are prone to leave wax paper and cellophane around picnic areas, these
birds find such materials a good substitute for snakeskins.

  Sometimes he is a rowdy;
  More often he’s demure.
  And drapes his home with snakeskins
  To make him feel secure.


Eastern Wood Pewee
_Contopus virens_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Some early morning in May, when the trees are filled with migrants, take
a stroll thru the woods! The world is filled with bird notes and you
listen to the symphony of sound. Then you hear a questioning whisper
“pee-a-wee,” as if some stranger wondered if he should or could make
himself heard. Finally you locate the bird with the plaintive note and
find a little flycatcher, but since he is sitting on a well-shaded limb,
you have trouble with the markings. Eventually you see that he is about
sparrow-size, is a dusky olive-brown above with whitish under parts,
lacks an eye ring but shows 2 distinct wing bars. That is the Eastern
Wood Pewee.

Western observers will find the Western Wood Pewee to be a bird with
nearly the same markings and habits. However, the western bird has a
more nasal, single note song. Tho both birds place their nests on tops
of limbs, the Eastern Wood Pewee builds a shallower structure, well
covered with lichens and cobwebs, giving it the appearance of a knot on
the limb. Both nest in rather open situations. Both birds feed heavily
on insects and spiders, including many harmful weevils, flies and
beetles. Unfortunately they draw no distinction between useful parasites
and pests.

  On summer breeze
  We hear your call,
  You speak your name
  But with a drawl.


Tree Swallow
_Iridoprocne bicolor_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The frost hardly has left the ground, or the peepers and cricket frogs
assembled their chorus, when flocks of these swallows can be seen
winging their way northward. First flights include only the rugged males
which arrive well in advance of their mates. They also are one of the
last species of swallows to migrate in the fall. These birds show
whitish under parts, while the upper parts are a greenish steel-blue.
Western observers might confuse this bird with the Violet-green Swallow
but remember that the latter shows a conspicuous white patch on each
side of the rump.

Tree Swallows prefer a location near water and soon will occupy holes in
stumps so located: however, bird houses are acceptable. They do not
choose to nest in colonies and will defend their nesting site with
vigor. Those who erect nesting boxes for these swallows might find it
necessary to help them evict House Sparrows which often take a liking to
their homes. Flying insects form the major portion of this bird’s food.
These include numerous mosquitoes and other insects which hatch on or
near water, for that seems to be their favorite feeding ground. Other
foods include bayberry and wax myrtle berries, which are sought during
migration.

  A flash of white
  With glimpse of blue,
  We see you’re back
  And welcome you.


Cliff Swallow
_Petrochelidon pyrrhonota_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Cliff Swallows may be found in almost any part of North America but the
west offers more overhanging cliffs where they assemble in large
colonies. Their one requirement is an ample supply of mud for their use
in building the jug-shaped structure which they attach to buildings,
under bridges or overhanging cliffs. Mud reinforced with a few straws,
makes a sturdy home, and when lined with feathers, what more could a
Cliff Swallow want? House Sparrows also find these little adobe houses
inviting, but are not popular neighbors.

This species is easily recognized by the buffy rump patch. Other
markings include: a dull white patch above the bill, crown and back of
head blue-black, nape brownish gray, back blue-black striped with gray,
chestnut over cheek and eye, black patch on lower throat, with chest
flanks and sides grayish-brown with rest of under parts white. These
birds show more of an assortment of colors than other species.

It is interesting to watch these birds gathering mud for their nests.
Always they hold their wings high above their backs and trip daintily
around until they get a mouthful of mud, but hesitate to get either
their feet wet or their wings soiled.

  With buffy rump
  And tail so square,
  We have no doubt
  That you are there.


White-breasted Nuthatch
_Sitta carolinensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Nuthatches are one of the few “upside-down” birds. Chickadees and
titmice sometimes feed by hanging below a cone or some limb which they
want to explore; woodpeckers and Brown Creepers may brace themselves
beneath a limb, but nuthatches seem to feel more at ease, when coming
down a tree headfirst. That must be an advantage for they may see food
which the climbers overlook. It is amazing to see the ease with which
they travel, never using their tails as props.

The White-breasted Nuthatch, largest of the family, is about
sparrow-size (6 inches), and shows a bluish-gray back, white under parts
with blackish crown and nape. Beady black eyes are noticeable since they
are surrounded by the white cheeks. These birds seem to favor deciduous
trees rather than evergreens, the preferred habitat of the smaller
Red-breasted Nuthatch.

A supply of nut meats and suet on your feeder seems to attract these
birds. You might decide, after watching them for a short time, that such
a small bird could not eat such a quantity of food. A further check will
show that he is thrifty, making trip after trip to hide choice morsels
for future use. He is never sure how long the supply will last.

  I watch you coming
  Down a tree,
  But why you should
  Amazes me.


Carolina Wren
_Thryothorus ludovicianus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Americans are fortunate. There are a lot of reasons, but one is the fact
that we have several species of wrens. There is something about these
birds that demands immediate attention. It might be their size, for most
are small. It might be their songs, for most are good singers. It might
be their trim, sleek-looking jauntiness—some might even call it
cockiness. These birds are popular around mansions or weather-beaten
shacks.

For those of us who live south of the area of severe winters, and east
of the plains, the Carolina Wren might be classed as a favorite bird.
Any wooded area, especially one with small streams running thru it,
makes ideal habitat for this songster. The more tangles and brushy
undergrowth, the better he will like it.

If you don’t happen to recognize any of his numerous songs, his size and
coloring will lead to his identity. He is as large as a small sparrow
(5½ to 6 inches), rufous red above with buffy under parts. He shows a
white line over the eye and faint wing bars. The Bewick’s Wrens and
Long-billed Marsh Wrens show a line over the eye, both are smaller.
Bewick’s has white tips on the tail feathers, while the latter shows
distinct stripes down the back.

  That cheerful song,
  Your roundelay,
  Rings thru the woods
  ’Most every day.


Brown Thrasher
_Toxostoma rufum_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This long-tailed bird (with the rufous-brown color, white wing bars,
curved bill, striped breast and yellow eyes) welcomes spring with a loud
and cheerful song. You will see him sitting at the top of some tall
tree, throwing all his efforts into loud, clear notes. You will notice a
wide variety of tones but all seem to run to couplets and triplets, not
like the steady tempo of the Mockingbird or the more subdued tones of
the Catbird, both of which are near relatives.

The next time you see him, he is likely to be under a hedge or around a
brushy area, busily engaged in moving any leaves or other rubbish which
might hide a lurking insect. Another favorite habitat is along the
less-traveled country roads, where he always seems to think he should be
on the opposite side and makes a quick, running flight to get there.

Brown Thrashers are found in suitable habitat anywhere east of the Rocky
Mountains and sometimes spend the winter far north of their usual
southern range. Sennett’s Thrasher is similar but is found in the
southern parts of Texas. Brown Thrashers are often called “Brown
Thrushes,” but thrushes have short tails, a different type of song, and
prefer a different habitat.

  You pair your notes,
  Then triple some,
  Which lets us know
  That spring has come.


Wood Thrush
_Hylocichla mustelina_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

To know the Wood Thrush is to love him. Unfortunately he seldom visits
cities unless parks or other heavily-wooded areas are found within the
borders. Forests, with a plentiful undercover, offer the seclusion which
this bird demands. There you will hear the flute-like tones which make
this bird famous as a singer. It is not a continued effort; each series
of notes is followed by a rest, allowing you to absorb the full beauty
of the rounded tones—then another, but completely different series,
sometimes higher, sometimes lower, but always the same pure quality.
Some think the Hermit Thrush is a better singer, but the Wood Thrush is
a close competitor.

When you invade his domain he will greet you with a series of scolding
notes, but that gives you a chance to see him. You will notice he is
slightly smaller than a Robin, has a heavily-spotted breast and a rufous
head, the back wings and tail more of a reddish cinnamon-brown. They
nest rather low and use either mud or leaf mold in building a sturdy
structure. This is an eastern bird but ranges from Minnesota, Ontario
and New Hampshire south almost to the Gulf. A few winter around the Gulf
of Mexico but most prefer the more southern areas of Mexico, Central
America and Panama.

  If mortals had
  Your gift of song,
  Some popular tunes
  Would seem less long.


Olive-backed Thrush
_Hylocichla ustulata_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Olive-backed Thrush and the Gray-cheeked Thrush are similar. Both
show olive-brown backs, light under parts and lighter spots than the
Wood Thrush. The Olive-backed is slightly smaller and shows a more
distinct eye ring, buffier cheeks and breast. This bird’s song is a
series of flute-like tones which spiral upward. A. D. DuBois (M.S.
quoted by Bent in Bulletin 196-1949-P. 184) thinks of it as saying
“whip-poor-will-a-will-a-zee-zee-zee.” The Veery’s song starts high and
runs down the scale, while the Gray-cheeked Thrush’s song, tho similar
in quality, shows less variation and ends on a slightly higher note.

Except a narrow range west of the Cascades and Sierra Nevada mountains,
occupied by a western race, the Russet-backed Thrush, Olive-backs can be
found from Northern North America to Central South America, depending on
the season of the year. One of the nice things about this bird is that
he sings during migration, giving bird lovers a chance to hear his song
without traveling to the land of spruce, fir and birch, which is a
favorite nesting area.

More than 63 per cent of this bird’s food is animal matter and includes
many beetles. Wild, soft-skinned fruits with occasional seeds complete
the diet.

  A swirl of notes
  Ascending high
  Like whirlwinds
  That reach the sky.


Blue-gray Gnatcatcher
_Polioptila caerulea_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This tiny bird, smaller than a chickadee, never seems to have a quiet
moment. On first sight, one is reminded of a Mockingbird, but not from
his color, for he is blue-gray above and whitish below. It might be the
long tail with the black center and white sides or perhaps it is the
trim build. There is a narrow, white eye ring, and the male shows a dark
line above the bill. These marks are sometimes difficult to see due to
the bird’s restlessness. The tail seems to be constantly in motion. Both
birds utter call notes, a thin “spee” or “zpee” sound. His song itself
is faint and seldom heard.

These birds range from Southern Canada to Guatemala and are permanent
residents in some states bordering the Gulf, but sporadic in their
northern range.

The Gnatcatcher is an early migrant and can be found well into his
nesting range by the middle of April. Nests sometimes are constructed in
advance of egg-laying dates. Perhaps the bird is taking advantage of a
supply of building materials which are seasonal. It frequently
dismantles the first nest, using the contents in the construction of
another nest in a more favorable location. It is built of plant down and
other materials, bound with webs and covered with lichens.

  A whispered “spee”
  From yonder tree,
  Gives us a clue
  That it is you.


Ruby-crowned Kinglet
_Regulus calendula_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

When you hear this bird sing, you are impressed by the beauty of clear,
but variable notes. When you check the source, you are surprised to see
a tiny bird with such a big voice. His short tail might lead you to
believe he is even smaller than the 3¾ to 4½ inches which he measures.
His coloring is not impressive, being an olive-gray. You might notice
the distinct eye ring or the prominent wing bars. If he is excited by
your close inspection, he might flash the ruby crown feathers, from
which he gets his name.

In fall you might think this bird was a warbler for he has some of the
warbler actions. He constantly flicks his wings and tail in a nervous
manner, but you will miss the tail markings of the warblers. The
Golden-crowned Kinglet is similar in size and general markings, but both
male and female show distinctive gold crown patches. The Golden-crowned
seems a little more rugged and spends his winters farther north.

These birds nest in the spruce belt of Canada and spend the winter in
Southern United States with scattering records as far north as Iowa. The
Western Ruby-crowned Kinglet is similar in appearance but has a slightly
different song. It frequently nests as far south as New Mexico.

  We look at you,
  A tiny thing,
  And marvel at
  The way you sing.


Cedar Waxwing
_Bombycilla cedrorum_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Waxwings are the nomads of the bird world; like gypsies, they come and
go. Apparently they drift southward in the fall and northward in the
spring, but have no regular migration. They range from Southern Canada
to Central America but might leave when it frosts or stay thru the
winter. Unlike some “Knights of the Road,” they present a neat
appearance. In fact the soft, brownish-gray plumage, fading into lighter
under parts, the slate-colored tail with the yellow tip, the jaunty
crest, the black eye mask, the reddish spot on the wing, the sleek,
streamlined stance—all mark him as an aristocrat.

Waxwings like companions and travel in flocks. Where you find one, you
might find a dozen or more than one hundred. Whether feeding or resting,
you will hear them conversing in a high-pitched, wheezy note which is
difficult to describe. Some refer to it as a hiss, others as a whine.

When an ample supply of food is available, Cedar Waxwings gorge
themselves until they seem rather listless. Various fruits and berries
are relished, but insects and cankerworms are taken in season.

The Bohemian Waxwing is slightly larger, grayer and shows more white on
the wing and brown under-tail coverts.

  You’re just a glutton,
  That we know,
  For you’re not one
  To eat and go.


Warbling Vireo
_Vireo gilvus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Warbling Vireo is not colorful. If you happen to see his back, you
will see he is a grayish olive-green, slightly grayer on the head. When
looked at from below, and that is the way you generally see him, you may
see a tinge of yellow on the white under parts. A white line over the
eye is the only other marking. But don’t give up; you will note the
slow, deliberate vireo movement. He loves to sing and soon you will hear
a pleasing series of notes, all connected but each note on a different
pitch; a wave of bird notes, not hurried but clear and musical. This
song could be confused with that of the Purple Finch but the latter is
slightly higher in pitch and faster.

Unlike other vireos, he likes to nest in the high, deciduous trees which
line the streets of cities and towns. Parks and farm homes also offer
suitable habitat. The nest is a neat structure, placed near the end of a
drooping branch on some well-developed tree; one which is growing in the
open, for these small birds like plenty of room around their homes. The
male is so proud of his home he often sings while taking his turn with
the incubating.

The Western Warbling Vireo has a similar song, seems inclined to nest
nearer the ground, but shuns evergreens.

  His note is just a warble.
  You cannot write it down.
  But you are bound to hear it
  If you walk ’round the town.


Black and White Warbler
_Mniotilta varia_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Warblers are an unusual family of birds. Some act like flycatchers and
often feed on flying insects. Others join the vireos in searching for
larvae in the thick foliage of higher trees. A few mingle with
sandpipers and find their food along the banks of some small stream,
while the ground-dwelling contingent share choice morsels with thrushes.
The Black and White Warbler is different, for while nesting on or near
the ground, he feeds on the trunk or larger limbs of trees, combining
the upward movement of the Brown Creeper with reverse actions of
nuthatches. His is more of a swing movement, quickly switching as if
undecided whether to go up or down. Various beetles, ants, weevils,
plant lice and larvae are included in his diet.

This bird can be distinguished from the similar Black-polled Warbler by
the white stripe down the center of the crown and the white line over
the eye. Their habits and songs are different.

Due to its feeding habits, the Black and White Warbler does not depend
on extensive foliage to furnish a supply of caterpillars, and migrates
earlier than many of this colorful family. Fall migration may find him
lingering well into October, before departing for his winter home.

  He’s black and white,
  As you can see
  When he climbs ’round
  That rough-barked tree.


Yellow Warbler
_Dendroica petechia_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Yellow Warbler, commonly called “Wild Canary,” is the best-known
member of the warbler family. Its breeding range extends from the
northern part of Alaska, thru Canada, United States and into Mexico, and
from coast to coast. It winters as far south as Peru. Unlike most
warblers, this friendly little bird seems to enjoy being near people and
may nest in some shrub or bush near your home.

You will recognize him instantly for he is the yellowest of all our
warblers, even in confusing fall plumage. The male shows pale, chestnut
streaks on the throat, breast and sides. The female may show a few
obscure markings, but not the distinct pattern worn by her mate.

Yellow Warblers build a compact little nest using grasses, plant down,
wool, cotton, hair or feathers, depending on available materials. Nests
range from 3 to 60 feet above ground, with a tendency to build them low
when suitable sites are found. Cowbirds are this bird’s worst enemy for
one or more Cowbird eggs can be found in most Yellow Warbler nests. They
have learned to combat this menace by adding another story to their
structure, thereby covering unwanted eggs with a new layer of nesting
material. In some instances as many as 6 stories have been added.

  A sunbeam marked
  With heavier ray
  Flits ’cross the yard
  Each summer day.


Northern Water-thrush
_Seiurus noveboracensis_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

It is easy to see why these warblers are called water-thrushes. They
resemble thrushes and usually are found near water. When you see him
walking down a half-submerged log or wading along the edges of a pool,
you will find he teeters like a Spotted Sandpiper. You also will notice
the dark, olive-brown back, yellowish stripe over the eye, the throat
and under parts buffy-yellow streaked with dark olive. The slightly
larger Louisiana Water-thrush shows a white line over the eye, white or
buffy-white under parts, unmarked white throat with duller streaks under
the body. The Ovenbird, a near relative, shows an eye ring,
reddish-orange crown and lacks the line over the eye. Western observers
will find that Grinnell’s Water-thrush is slightly larger with lighter
eye lines and under parts.

During migration, the Northern Water-thrush might appear in your yard or
garden, but edges of swamps, ponds or streams appeal to him most. To see
him at his best it is necessary to invade secluded areas around cool
bogs, mountain streams or northern lakes. There you will hear the loud
song, a series of clear but emphatic notes. His well-hidden nest may be
found by stumps or roots or moss-covered logs.

  This funny little warbler
  Likes water on his feet,
  And when it comes to singing
  He’s really hard to beat.


Yellow-breasted Chat
_Icteria virens_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

The Yellow-breasted Chat is not only the largest, but the most
unwarbler-like of this colorful family. If you live near thickets of
dense shrubbery, where brier tangles and brushy, low bushes grow in
profusion, there you will find this bird. He prefers low, damp ground
but does not overlook similar habitat on dry hillsides. His loud and
varied song will let you know when he arrives. Each series of notes is
followed by a long pause, and then another series, but on an entirely
different pitch; clear-whistled notes, low grating tones, caws or
reed-like tones all find a place in this bird’s song.

When you invade his territory, you will find he is elusive, but a little
patient waiting on your part will bring him out. Then you can check the
olive-brown back and rich, lemon-yellow breast fading to white beneath
the tail. The white line just above the eye combines with an eye ring,
as if he were wearing spectacles. You might even see the short, stout
bill or the rounded wings. Its long tail gives this bird a length of 7½
inches. He might entertain you with his clown-like antics by fluttering
into the air with his head down and feet dangling, but accompanied by
some of his sweetest music.

  A clown at heart,
  He lets you know
  That he is pleased
  To steal the show.


Wilson’s Warbler
_Wilsonia pusilla_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

When you make this bird’s acquaintance, you will wonder why he was not
called a “Black-capped Warbler,” for no name would be more fitting. In
fact, many ornithologists now refer to him by that name. Those who do
their birding in the Western United States might feel the same about the
Pileolated Warbler, which is similar. Both birds show olive-green above
and yellow below, with no wing marks or other distinguishing features,
except the black cap worn by the males. Some females carry this mark
faintly outlined, but it is lacking on the young. The western bird is
slightly larger.

During migration this warbler seems to prefer low bushes and shrubs to
the higher trees and is found around parks or bushes bordering streams.
They seem friendly but move so rapidly that you may miss the black cap.
They combine the usual warbler antics with those of small flycatchers by
capturing many flying insects; however, they are not inclined to return
to the same perch, but hurry on their way.

The song is a rapid series of notes with little variation except the
last tones, which are slightly lower in pitch. They nest on the ground
near water or swampy areas such as sphagnum bogs of the north or alder
and willow valleys of the west.

  That little cap
  Upon your head
  Gives us the clue,
  Or so we’ve read.


Yellow-headed Blackbird
_Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Eastern birders are unfortunate for only on rare occasions do they have
a chance to see and study this handsome bird. He is larger than the
Red-winged Blackbird, with which he often is associated, but smaller
than the Grackles. During migration, they join other members of their
family in feed lots, pastures or fields and any mixed flock is worth
inspecting. They are identified easily for no other bird has the black
body, white wing patch and yellow head and breast. The female lacks wing
markings and shows dusky, grayish-brown coloring with a yellowish tinge
on lighter head markings. They walk with almost a strut, as if they were
proud of their brilliant plumage.

Yellow-headed Blackbirds nest in colonies and affix their bulky nests to
tules and other vegetation which grow in the center of marshes and
swamps in western areas. There seems to be a tendency to move eastward,
for a few are nesting in the marshes of the upper Mississippi valley.

Their song is distinctive and consists of a series of chuckles, squeaks
and grating notes, all produced by what seems to be a great physical
effort. The results hardly justify such a strain.

  Your favorite call,
  So loud and harsh,
  Would scare the frogs
  In any marsh.


Baltimore Oriole
_Icterus galbula_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Most people are attracted to birds by one of 3 things—their brilliant
plumage, a beautiful song or the way they build their nests. The
Baltimore Oriole scores in every department. Few birds are more colorful
than an adult male, perched on the top of some tall tree, in full
sunlight. The rich-orange body glows like a living ember. When you add
the black of the head, back, wings and central tail feathers, the white
wing bar and feather edging on the wings and the orange outer feathers,
near the end of the tail, the contrasting pattern is unique. The female
and young are less colorful with dull black and yellowish-orange
markings and 2 distinct wing bars.

The Baltimore Oriole’s song is a rich melodious whistle which varies
slightly when given by different birds, but retains the oriole quality.
It could be confused with songs of some of the grosbeaks, but the latter
use more “chip” notes with their whistles. Western birders will find a
similar quality in the songs of Bullock’s and Scott’s Orioles.

For nesting sites, they choose a spot near the end of some drooping
branch, where they construct a deep, well-woven, gourd-shaped structure
which swings in the breeze. Grasses and string furnish building
material.

  A lot of grass
  And bits of string,
  Will make their home
  A wondrous thing.


Bronzed Grackle
_Quiscalus quiscula_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Almost everyone who lives or has traveled any place east of the Rocky
Mountains has seen this bird. The chances are they call it a blackbird,
for most people do. From his appearance, they are right. Since there are
a number of different species of blackbirds, this one should be examined
more closely. When you see him walking around your yard, you will notice
he is larger than a Robin, has a wedge-shaped tail and yellow eyes. The
male often shows a keel-shaped tail, when flying. The plumage is
iridescent and may show green, blue or purple. Those who live along the
Atlantic coast refer to these birds as Purple Grackles, a name which is
becoming popular for both the eastern and western types.

Grackles gather in huge flocks and can do much damage to unharvested
crops. In mixed flocks, grackles show a more even flight pattern than
most blackbirds.

Other birds are not happy when grackles nest in their area for these
birds are inclined to add both eggs and young of smaller birds to their
diet. Credit must be given the grackle, however, for he mixes numerous
insects with his diet of fruit and grain.

  We watch you dunking
  Crusts so thick,
  And wonder where
  You learned the trick.


Blue Grosbeak
_Guiraca caerulea_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Many birders seem to have trouble in listing the Blue Grosbeak. One
reason is the size, for they are smaller than most members of this
family. Another reason is that light conditions often make them appear
black. A third reason might be their choice of habitat. They prefer
brushy areas near some stream, but may be found along woodland borders
or hedges, where ample brush is found. They usually nest in low trees or
shrubs. There you probably will find the male as he sings from the top
of some bush or even utility wire which crosses his territory. You can
see he is a deep, but rather dull blue, with 2 chestnut wing bars. The
female is brown and shows 2 buffy wing bars. Both show a heavy beak
which gives them their name.

Blue Grosbeaks nest from Maryland to California but shun the northern
states. They winter as far south as Honduras and are fonder of warm
weather than most members of their family.

The Blue Grosbeak has a beautiful finch-like song, using a short series
of notes which rise and fall into a sweet warble. It is slower than the
song of the Purple Finch and does not carry like the usual grosbeak
song. Their food consists of insects and small seeds or grain.

  The male is blue,
  His mate is brown.
  But neither likes
  To live in town.


Pine Siskin
_Spinus pinus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Pine Siskins are unpredictable. Some years they are numerous, while
others produce few, if any, in the same area. Food supply is not
necessarily the answer, for they are erratic wanderers. These small
finches seem to prefer conifers for nesting. They build a neat
structure, using grass, bark or moss with a lining of finer materials.
Their home is well hidden by the heavy foliage near the end of a limb.
The eggs are a pale bluish-green, dotted with brown or black markings,
more colorful than the pale blue eggs of the American Goldfinch.

Siskins resemble goldfinches in their notes, flocking habits and size,
but can be identified by the uniform, striped appearance. They have
semi-concealed yellow patches near the body on both wings and tail.
Goldfinches show clear breasts in any plumage. Birders have found the
best clue to the identity of this bird is the long buzzy note which
forms a part of his song. His notes are husky in quality.

In winter siskins mingle with other finches in harvesting weed seeds.
Other food consists of seeds of various trees such as ash, birch or
elms, together with leaf buds. Most of their summer is spent in
evergreens which offer not only the nesting sites but food necessary for
growing families.

  That buzzy note
  Makes it a cinch
  To know you’re not
  Another finch.


Red-eyed Towhee
_Pipilo erythrophthalmus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Towhees inhabit thickets, bushes and brushy areas, and spend most of
their time scratching thru litter which covers the ground in such
locations. When disturbed, they usually utter the call note which gave
them their name. Opinions differ as to sounds made, so these birds are
referred to as “Towhees,” “Jorees” or “Chewinks.” Some call them “Ground
Robins,” since they feed on the ground and a part of their plumage
resembles that of our Robins.

Towhees are smaller than Robins. The male shows 3 distinct colors; the
head, throat, back, wings and tail are black; sides are rusty, and the
belly, outer tips of the tail and wing spots are white. The female is
browner but easily identified by the color pattern. Western birds are
called Spotted Towhees, since their wings and backs show more white
feathers. Both have red eyes. Those who do their birding along the coast
from South Carolina to Florida will find birds with lighter irises and
referred to as White-eyed Towhees.

These birds nest on the ground but do most of their singing from tops of
trees. Songs vary and may include a series of notes or 1 or 2 notes
followed by a trill.

  When he’s near you will hear
  A loud rustling sound,
  For he rakes as he takes
  Choice food from the ground.


Vesper Sparrow
_Pooecetes gramineus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Several kinds of sparrows can be found in open fields, along roadside
fences and hedgerows, but the Vesper Sparrow is easiest to identify. If
you should miss the chestnut patch on the bend of the wing or the white
belly, bordered by fine lines, you still will notice the white
outer-tail feathers. The back is a light grayish-brown with dark
stripes.

Juncos and pipits also have white outer-tail feathers, but adult juncos
show no stripes and pipits walk instead of hop. Western Vesper Sparrows
show less brown in their plumage, some being almost a light gray, but
still show darker lines on their backs, sides and breasts.

These birds use grass and small roots in building their nests, which
usually are in or near a clump of grass. Their eggs are grayish white,
heavily marked with brown.

Vesper Sparrows are good singers. Their best efforts seem to be late in
the evening, when dusk replaces the fleeting shadows; their musical
notes add a fitting benediction to the dying day. This chorus accounts
for the name. Songs vary, but usually start with 2 pairs of long
melodious notes, the second pair higher in pitch, then a series of rapid
notes beginning still higher, then coming down the scale to end in a
soft warble.

  You might have been a junco
  From markings on your tail,
  But you prefer the prairies
  Where breezes never fail.


Lark Sparrow
_Chondestes grammacus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

These large sparrows are easily identified. No other sparrow has a white
border around the tail or the distinctive chestnut and white head
pattern. Another mark is a distinct, dark spot on the breast.
Clay-colored Sparrows show a similar head pattern but lighter parts are
grayer and the cheek patch is duller, more brown than chestnut. The
latter-named bird has no spot on the breast.

Lark Sparrows prefer open areas along country roads, old orchards or
pastures with scattered trees or bushy hedges. Such habitat furnishes
nesting sites and a plentiful supply of insects, small seeds and grit
for their use. Altho usually a common species within its range, these
birds are inclined to be erratic and might be scarce one season and
abundant the next, with no apparent reason.

They nest on or near the ground but like to sing from a more elevated
perch such as a fence, bush or tree. Some sing while hovering in the
air. They cover a wide range but populations vary from year to year.

Their song is a series of melodious notes, varying in pitch but seeming
to include a few “churrs” which are quite distinctive. Songs vary
between birds, each bird giving a wide variety of notes in a short
period of time.

  You like the pastures
  With scattered trees,
  Where you can live
  A life of ease.


Chipping Sparrow
_Spizella passerina_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Chipping Sparrows are not only the friendliest, but one of the
best-known American sparrows. The reason is apparent, for yards, gardens
and parks furnish ideal habitat for these birds. They often nest in
vines or bushes just outside your window. Nesting materials include
grasses, rootlets and hairs, horsehair being used extensively, when
available. Their fondness for a horsehair lining in the nest sometimes
leads to casualties when either parents or young become entangled.

Chippies derive their name from their songs, a series of chip notes
which they utter. This is a rapid, unmusical series of notes, all on the
same pitch. They frequently join the Robins to start the day with song.
Juncos and some of the warblers also use a series of chip notes in their
songs, but with more variations and more musical in quality.

They feed heavily on insects and larvae, including various caterpillars,
beetles, ants and plant lice. Vegetable food amounts to a little more
than half their diet and includes seeds from grasses and weeds. Crab
grass seeds seem to be a favorite.

Western Chipping Sparrows are slightly larger and paler but show the
rusty cap, black beak and other markings which are distinctive.

  That chestnut cap,
  White line below,
  Black thru the eye,
  That’s you, we know.


White-crowned Sparrow
_Zonotrichia leucophrys_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

White-crowned Sparrows are known only as migrants or winter residents to
birders living east of the Great Plains. Westerners are more fortunate
for White-crowns and the similar Gambel’s and Nuttall’s Sparrows nest in
much of their area. When flushed from their feeding grounds, these birds
will impress you by their alert appearance. The habit of erecting the
crown feathers makes the head appear round and puffy, and brings out the
beauty of the broad black and white stripes which surround the white
crown.

These birds have a gray throat and breast, 2 wing bars, grayish-brown
backs with darker stripes. The feet and bill are pinkish. A white line
over the eye of the White-crowned Sparrow does not extend to the beak,
as it does on Gambel’s and Nuttall’s. Nuttall’s Sparrow has a yellow
bill.

White-throated Sparrows often are found in mixed flocks with
White-crowns, but the former show a distinct white throat patch, have
flatter heads, and a yellow spot between the bill and eye. The beak is
dark.

White-crowned Sparrows are good singers. Their songs vary but usually
start with a clear but plaintive whistle. Western varieties sing
differently but have a similar quality.

  When winter takes
  An angry mood,
  You visit us
  In search of food.


Song Sparrow
_Melospiza melodia_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Song Sparrows literally sang themselves into a name, for few birds sing
so persistently. To Thoreau these birds seemed to say: “Maids! maids!
maids! hang up your teakettle-ettle-ettle.” To you it may sound
differently, but you still will hear the sharp notes with which he
starts his song. These are on the same pitch with a slight pause between
each note. From there, the song is variable and may contain trills or
assorted notes on various pitches. One bird may produce several
different songs.

These birds prefer brushy or weedy areas near water but may nest near
your home if a bird bath is handy. No other bird seems to take as much
pleasure from bathing.

There are numerous geographic forms of this bird, which accounts for
wide variation in colors and sizes. The Desert Song Sparrow is light
while others are almost as rusty as Fox Sparrows. All Song Sparrows are
heavily striped, and show a distinct spot in the center of the breast,
and a dark line on each side of the throat. There is a gray stripe thru
the crown and a broader line over the eyes.

They usually migrate in March and October but wintering birds often are
found in the nesting range.

  It’s plain to see
  Why you’re so clean.
  You take a bath
  In every stream!


Lapland Longspur
_Calcarius lapponicus_

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Lapland Longspurs are birds of the far north, nesting as they do in the
arctic and sub-arctic regions of both eastern and western hemispheres.
They visit us only in the winter when deep snow and bitter cold drive
them from their homes. Flocks of these sparrow-sized birds may be found
in open fields, prairies and pastures, feeding on whatever seed or small
grain is available. They run rapidly, ever on the search for more food,
and may be joined by Horned Larks at good feeding spots.

They seem nervous and take wing frequently, circle here and there and
often return to the same location. They have a rolling, erratic flight
which reminds one of blowing leaves.

In breeding plumage these birds display a lot of color. The male has a
black head and chest, rufous nape, back and sides heavily striped and a
white belly. A buffy stripe behind the eye drops down the neck and
backward along the sides of the chest. In winter you will see a brownish
bird with blackish streaks and white under parts.

In their eagerness to return to their northern homes, Lapland Longspurs
often suffer heavy losses because of wet spring snows. Their song is
varied and sweet.

  Like blowing leaves,
  You come and go
  Across the prairies
  Flecked with snow.

       INDEX       PAGE                 WHEN THE BIRDS MAY BE SEEN
                        Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.

 Avocet               7                  .. ..                  .... ....  ..
 Blackbird,          20                  .. ...
   Yellow-headed
 Bobwhite             5 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Chat,               19                     oooo oooo oooo .... ....  .
   Yellow-breasted
 Duck, Ruddy          4 .... .... ..oo oooo o...                     ...o oooo ....
 Egret, Snowy         1                                      .. ....  .
 Flicker,             9 oooo oooo oooo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo oooo oooo
   Yellow-shafted
 Flycatcher,         11                  .o oooo oooo oooo oooo  ..
   Crested
 Gnatcatcher,        15                .ooo oooo oooo oo.. ....
   Blue-gray
 Goose, Canada        2 .... .... .ooo oo..                           ... .... ....
 Grackle, Bronzed    21 .... .... oXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oo.. ....
 Grosbeak, Blue      21                     .... .... ....
 Gull, Ring-billed    8 .... .... .ooo oooo o.                  .... .ooo oo.. ....
 Hawk, Marsh          5 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo oooo oooo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
 Heron, Green         2              . ..oo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo  ..
 Kinglet,            16 .... .... ...o oooo oo.                  .oo oooo .... ....
   Ruby-crowned
 Longspur, Lapland,  25 oooo oooo oo..                                    ..oo oooo
 Merganser,           4 XXXX XXXX XXXo oo.. .                           . ..oX XXXX
   American
 Nuthatch,           13 .... .... .... .... .... .                      . .... ....
   White-breasted
 Oriole, Baltimore   20                  .o XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo  o.
 Owl, Great-horned    9 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXoo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo ooXX XXXX
 Pelican, White       1                ..oo oo.. .... ..          .. oooo oo..
 Pewee, Eastern      11                     .ooo oooo oooo oooo ....
   Wood
 Phalarope,           8                  .. oo.               . ...
   Wilson’s
 Pintail, American    3 oooX XXXX XXXo oooo ..                . .... .ooo XXXX oooo
 Plover, Upland       6                 ... oooo oooo oooo oooo  .
 Siskin, Pine        22 .... .... .... oooo o.                            .... ....
 Snipe, Wilson’s      6        .. ...o oooo .                     .. .... ....
 Sparrow, Chipping   24              . oooo XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo ....  ..
 Sparrow, Lark       23              . .ooo XXXX XXXX XXXX ooo.
 Sparrow, Song       25 XXXX XXXX XXXX Xoo.                      ... ooXX XXXX XXXX
 Sparrow, Vesper     23 .... .... .... .XXX                        . oooo .... ....
 Sparrow,            24 .... .... .... ..oo Xo..                     .... .... ....
   White-crowned
 Swallow, Cliff      12                 .oo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXo ....  ..
 Swallow, Tree       12                oooo o..               . .... ...
 Teal, Blue-winged    3           ..oo XXXX XXXX oo..        .o XXXX XXXo  ..
 Thrasher, Brown     14 .... .... .... oXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX oooo oooo oo.. .... ....
 Thrush,             15                  .o XXXo .               ...  ..
   Olive-backed
 Thrush, Wood        14                   . oXXX XXXX Xo.. .... ....  .
 Towhee, Red-eyed    22 .... .... .... oooo oooo oooo oo.. .... .... .... .... ....
 Vireo, Warbling     17                  .o XXXX XXXX oo.. .... ....
 Warbler, Black      17                  .o oooo                  ..  ..
   and White
 Warbler, Wilson’s   19                     .oo.                ....
 Warbler, Yellow     18                  .o XXXX XXoo oo..       ...  ..
 Water-thrush,       18                   . oooo .               ... ...
   Northern
 Waxwing, Cedar      16 oooo XXXX oo.. .... .... ....             .. .... ..oo oooo
 Woodpecker,         10 XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
   Red-bellied
 Woodpecker,         10 .... .... .... ..oo XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXo .... .... ....
   Red-headed
 Wren, Carolina      13 oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo oooo
 Yellow-legs,         7            .oo XXXX Xo.          . oooo oooo oo..  .
   Greater

  . The dot or period indicates the bird is seen occasionally.
  o The small o shows the bird is seen more frequently.
  X The capital X shows the bird is seen commonly.

For example, during January and February, the Bronzed Grackle is seen
rarely. The first week in March, it is seen more frequently, after which
it is seen commonly until the middle of October. The table is based on
bird census figures collected within a radius of 50 miles of Topeka,
Kansas. Your area may show different results.


                             Kansas Farmer
                           Missouri Ruralist
                        The Topeka Daily Capital
                                  WIBW
                                WIBW-TV
                         The Kansas City Kansan
                             STATE JOURNAL
                            Capper’s Weekly
                            Michigan Farmer
                            The Ohio Farmer
                          Pennsylvania Farmer
                               HOUSEHOLD
                            Capper’s Farmer


                       Capper Publications, Inc.
               EIGHTH AND JACKSON STREET, TOPEKA, KANSAS




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Introduction to Our Bird Friends,
Volume 2, by Lenwood Ballard Carson

